---
layout: post
title: Why I ride
---

The other day I was having a drink with a few coworkers and one asked incredulously, &#8220;You had a major accident and you still ride?&#8221;  Indeed I do.   Today marks two years since my accident and I thought it a good time to reflect on why I ride.

First and formost is not much reason at all: I ride because I am drawn to it.  I&#8217;m not really sure what put that initial urge into my head.  It simpy appeared one day.

That urge likely would have come to naught but for [my pal Justin](http://twitter.com/#!/chewbaccajones) voicing a similar urge.  &#8220;I&#8217;ve been thinking about getting a motorcycle,&#8221; said he with a tentative note in his voice.  He was clearly expecting to be shot down. Instead he got an unexpected &#8220;Me too, actually.&#8221;  &#8220;Let&#8217;s do it!&#8221; said he.

By late August of 2001 I&#8217;d aquired the various safety gear, taken an introductory riding class, and was starting to look at ads for used bikes.  I was paralyzed by the options.  Then the September 11 attacks happened and one of many thoughts I had that day was that I could have been blown up, ending my life without ever having ridden.  I resolved to stop figuring out what was ideal and simply buy the first motorcycle I found which didn&#8217;t suck.  This prompted my neighbor Dan to point out that I was the first person he&#8217;d ever met whose fear of death caused him to <em>start</em> riding a motorcycle.

On my earliest rides, I kept thinking to myself, &#8220;Wow, I&#8217;m really doing it.  I&#8217;m really riding a motorcycle.&#8221;  That has ebbed over time, but hasn&#8217;t completely gone away.  It happens to me more after a brief hiatus from riding, and is always accompanied by &#8220;This is great.  Why on Earth did I ever stop doing this?&#8221;

Once I started riding, I found that I liked the sense of connection to my surroundings that a bike gives.  Robert Pirsig describes it well:

<blockquote>In a car you&#8217;re always in a compartment, and because you&#8217;re used to it you don&#8217;t realize that through that car window everything you see is just more TV. You&#8217;re a passive observer and it is all moving by you boringly in a frame.

&#8220;On a cycle the frame is gone. You&#8217;re completely in contact with it all. You&#8217;re in the scene, not just watching it anymore, and the sense of presence is overwhelming. That concrete whizzing by five inches below your foot is the real thing, the same stuff you walk on, it&#8217;s right there, so blurred you can&#8217;t focus on it, yet you can put your foot down and touch it anytime, and the whole thing, the whole experience, is never removed from immediate consciousness.</blockquote>

<br/>

Some of that connection is because the rider has no physical separation from the surroundings.  Some of it is simply due to presence of mind.  It takes a whole lot more skill to operate a motorcycle than to operate a car, and the cost of a mistake is a whole lot higher, so motorcyclists had better be attentive.

...which leads me to another reason I ride.  Fear.  &#8220;Aren&#8217;t you afraid?&#8221; my Aunt Madeleine asked.  Of course I am.  The day I stop being afraid and start approaching riding in a cavaleer way, it will be time for me to stop riding.  The fear of crashing keeps me doing the things that make me safer.

In addition to inducing mindfulness, fear has it&#8217;s own value. While I don&#8217;t enjoy bowel-loosening terror, I do enjoy facing up to my fears and overcoming them.  I see so many people whose llves are stifled and dominated by fear. Arguably we all are at one time or another.  I am convinced that regularly spending some time owning my fear and facing up to it makes me a stronger person in the rest of my life.

Aside from all that metaphysical claptrap, there are some perfectly good nuts-and-bolts reasons I enjoy riding.

<ul>
 <li>Riding is a physical skill which I can spend many years developing.

No matter how good I manage to get, there will always be more to achieve.  I am going to keep right on practicing, reading, and taking classes for as long as I can ride.  As any musician, or knitter, or baseball player will tell you, investing in that sort of ongoing refinement can be very satisfying.

<li>Riding is also a mental and perceptual skill I can develop.

After reading <a href="http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/search-handle-url/index=books&amp;field-author=Keith%20Code/002-1638776-9327220">Keith Code</a>&#8217;s books I began working on using my peripheral vision, and learning to look farther ahead, consciously adjusting my breadth and range of awareness.  Not only does this let me spot trouble sooner-- giving me time to plan and react --it's just plain neat to see my senses improve.

<li>Parking in a crowded city is easy on a motorcycle.

Wherever I go on a bike, there is nearly always a nook in which to park.  On those rare occasions when I actually have to pay for parking, it costs a whole lot less.

<li>Motorcycles have all sorts of geek appeal.

We geeks love any complex subject with lots of rich detail.  Motorcycles fill the bill quite nicely. </ul>

Not only are riders more connected to their surroundings than drivers, we are more physically connected to the act of operating our vehicles.  In a car I turn the wheel.  To turn my bike I lean it over, my body leaning with it.  Applying the brakes, I tighen my midsection and try to loosen my arms, so as not to disturb the steering as the rear of the bike lifts a bit and my body is pushed forward by inertia.

One day a coworker said to me, seemingly out of nowhere, &#8220;you must have ridden in today.&#8221;  How on earth had she guessed? &#8220;Because there is a spring in your step,&#8221; said she.  I hadn&#8217;t been aware of it before, but she was certainly right.  Riding in puts me in a much better mood than making the same trip by car.

I suspect the cause is a combination of the attention demanded by riding and the sheer enjoyment of it.  Somehow the effects of the ride linger well into my day.  It turns out I am not alone.  Studies show that taken as a group, we motorcyclists arrive at work more relaxed, alert, and attentive than our four-wheeled colleagues.

Pulling up in front of the office, or anywhere else, I park and dismount feeling satisfied.  I have a giddy sense of having accomplished something, at least in my own head.  Each ride is a gift, and I am quite thankful for every one.</lj-cut>